From Hanselman it's dot com
it's Hansel minutes or weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 78. Accorded live
Friday, August 24th, 2007. Support for Hanselman
it's is provided by teller.
Already controls the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal the world's
leading.net developer magazine. Online at
www dot  dot com.
Please make a tax deductible
donation to help fight diabetes
at hanselman.com/fight diabetes. In this
episode, Scott talks about the
2007 ultimate tools list. Hi,
this is Carl Franklin. Welcome to
Hansel minutes, and I'm here
with Scott Hanselman. And of
course we're talking today about
Scott's 2000 ultimate developer and
power users tool list for
windows. How's it going, Scott?
That's going pretty well. We
did the tools list again
this year, I guess I
just said we me, me
late at night, the Royal
we, and I've been doing
this list since 2003. And
when we, when I update
it, I do all of
the, the updated entries and
the new entries in red.
So this is up at
hanselman.com/tools, and it's getting actually
it got so big that
it broke feed burner last
year. Wow. Because it's something
like 500 K when it
turns into HTML. So the,
it blew up. It didn't
really blow up, but it
basically overflowed how much they
think that a normal RSS
feed should be. So I
had to open a ticket
with them. Hey, before we
get into the tools, let's
revisit 'em last week show,
right? Last week show is
when we talked about moving
life into the cloud, right.
Moving into the cloud, and
we're going to explore live
custom domains. Right? You had
set up a male, all
your friends and family on
Google apps. And I said,
I would, I was going
to try windows live. So
right. I did. I tried
it. I was really, really
impressed by the simplicity of
the interface and in the
uncluttered nature of, you know,
of setting things up, it
was very easy to do.
The administrative interface was very
clean. Yes, it was. Yeah.
There was a couple of
things, a couple of features
missing that were deal breakers
for me, but apparently they're
coming, but I just couldn't
wait. And the one was
there. Isn't a good way
to, to move existing emails
up there. Yeah. That's a
problem with Google as well.
I mean, you can, if
you pay the premium for
the 10 gigs and you
have an IMAP account, moving
is no problem at all,
but I had to actually
purchase another $30 utility of
a cool little company called
limit nun that basically pushes
all my mail up and
then brings it all back
down again. It was kind
of a complicated experience. There's
no reason that you shouldn't
be able to upload a
PST and have them open
it up and stick it
into the mail. Yeah, That
was my thought too. Or,
or at least a CSV
file or something simple, but,
okay. So that was one
and the other one, which
was really more important to
me cause you know, third
party tools or third party
tools. And if I can
get my email up there
somehow that's great. But the
deal breaker was I couldn't
forward an email to, I
couldn't forward emails from one
account to an account that
wasn't a Hotmail account or
an MSN account. So you're
saying if you're a male
is up at live customer
domains, you couldn't turn around
and have it forwarded back
outside. That's right. Probably do
avoid spam, but definitely something
that they need to do
that seems like, I think
you're right. I think it's
a spam prevention measure because
forwarding, having, having a email
addresses that can forward to
other email addresses is the
main cause of spam. I
mean, that's the main tool
that spammers use. Well, you
gave it a try. Yeah.
I give it a try.
And if I had more
time, I could wait for
that feature to come out,
but I just don't have
more time, so. Sure. Well,
it looks more there's stuff
in it in a couple
months and see how it
goes. Yup. Alright. So onto
the list. So the list
is, like I said, it's
getting bigger and bigger this
year. Everything is in red
that has been added lots
and lots of things like
literally literally dozens and dozens
of links of an updated.
It's amazing when you maintain
a list, that's this big,
the amount of link rot,
this thing, if you print
it out, something like 20
pages now and the number
of links that rotted and
people did not even bother
to redirect was really disturbing.
And I received at least
six emails within the first
few hours from people saying,
well, you're linking to me
and it looks like there's
a page there, but that's
really the old page. Would
you link here? It would
have been nice if everyone
was using 301 redirects and
I could have run it
a utility, which I did
to check all of the
links and then report, which
one has been updated. So
I could have watched for
three Oh one and three
Oh two redirects and had
the list automatically update itself.
But instead I get email
from people saying you're pointing
to the wrong place, please
point here, which is fine.
But I just thought that
was an interesting little aspect
of the, of the web.
This is a one I
list I update every year,
usually in July or August
and the links rot. And
I have no way to
automatically update them. It's going
to think that people, many
people who put Up websites
still don't think of them
as sites that are going
to be, they think of
only as sites, they're going
to be read by eyes
and not by, you know,
lengths or yeah, yeah. Yeah.
Well, there's also a sense
of, of impermanence, but you
know, I'm looking at my
archives here and I started
in April of 2002, five
years in the scope of
things is very, very short,
but at least all the
links still work and the
links to my old radio
web work anyway. All right.
So in the first category
here, we've got big 10
life and work changing utilities.
And these are just kind
of my top 10 favorite.
I always come to these
utilities and these did not
change that much this year
when something is pretty awesome.
It's not likely to change,
but I did have two
additions. The first was E
text editor. I just can't
seem to decide between notepad
to notepad plus plus and
E but he is the
addition to the list at
the top there. And it
is just a really amazing
basically they call it text
made for windows. Text mates
are really famous application on
them, on the Mac that
a lot of the rails
guys have used. And it
basically plays in Cygwin. You
know, Cygwin is that Linux
like environment for windows and
lets you build what are
called bundles. So then rather
than just having syntax highlighting
where you've got colors for
a particular file type, you've
got bundles of information that
are macros little programs, a
little insert, insert expansions that
are specific to that file
type. So there's like the
HTML bundle, but then there's
the HTML blogging bundle and
the XHTML bundle. And these
all include custom commands just
specific to that particular thing.
And the bundles use Cygwin.
So you can write these
bundles yourself by shelling out
into Python or shelling out
into a bash shell and
modify your, your world. So
if someone wanted to make
a PowerShell bundle and make
a eText editor that much
more friendly, they could, One
thing that's missing from the
ed tech Senator webpage is
a real screenshot. Yeah. The
text editor I'm a webpage
has a bunch of screencasts,
but I do like to
see a screenshot. As soon
as I hit a page,
I want to see a
screenshot or a big button
that says click here for
the gallery. It's funny how
many, how many places you'll
visit and you'll hunt for
a screenshot. And I really
should see that first screenshot
right off the bat. Part
of the impatience of the
internet, PowerShell is still on
the list, but a couple
of really cool things have
happened in PowerShell this year.
One that is really of
note I thought was called
power tab by the powershellGuy@thepowershellguy.com.
And you've seen like ANSI
art. Remember when we had
at the, at the command
line, we would draw boxes
and you'd have winter environments
like turbo vision, Orland, turbo
vision. And they would build
these wintering environments just using
anti-art. He has basically made
tab completion at the command
line as a script using
antsy art like construct so
that you can start typing
in PowerShell hit tab then
rather than getting the classic
tab completion that we're used
to seeing in the, in
dos at CMD dot exe,
we'll see an actual answer
pop up and he'll automatically
reflect over all of the.net
framework assemblies that are in
the current app domain build
up a little database, all
of the WMI classes and
makes a really fast and
easy way to, to start
using PowerShell. It's really very
amazing. Another thing is the
PowerShell community extensions. This is
a really great thing about
code Plex is that right
now it seems like when
a Microsoft product comes out,
if it has an extensibility
point and someone doesn't like
some aspect of it, minutes
later, the whatever community extensions
version goes up with, you
know, the couple of dozen
commands that didn't make it
into V one. So then
people will build these extensions
for them. And this one
includes all sorts of, of
cool commandlets and functions that
are things like out speech.
So you could be at
command line and PowerShell pipe,
something out to out hyphen
speech and it would talk
it to you. Things like
that, just all sorts of
cool things you didn't know
you needed. And then the
other big thing on the,
the big 10 list this
year was this was Firebug
Firebug is, is really an
in-browser IDE for JavaScript, Ajax,
CSS, HTML, debugging. It is
truly amazing if you haven't
used this thing, you really
need to check it out.
It's a complete debugger that
lives in is installed in
Firefox as an extension. And
it has its own extension
techniques as well. So you
can extend fire Firefox with
Firebug, but then Firefox can
have Firebug rather she's me
can have its own extensions
as well. Now I'm curious
as to why you didn't
put this in a developer
category. I did actually. That's
funny that you mentioned that
when something is so incredibly
awesome on the list, I
put it two and three
times. So if you find
something more than one place,
that means that it's so
intensely awesome. You must get
it immediately. Yeah, totally. Yeah.
So it's down there to
Firebug includes things like profiling
of your JavaScript, like a,
you know, just if your
performance and finding JavaScript bottlenecks,
it also lets you execute
JavaScript on the fly. Kind
of like the immediate window
in visual studio as well
as a full JavaScript thing.
So as much as I
despise JavaScript of just because
I'm not good at it,
I don't like playing with
it. Cause it's just seems
so loosey goosey having an
IDE like this alongside of
visual studio, 2008, it's just
really clean. So if the
visual studio 2008 scripty bugger
doesn't need it, doesn't do
what I want to do.
I'll flip over to Firebug
and I can see all
sorts of information. And then
there's a thing called why
slow? You heard about why
slow this is Yahoo's performance
labs. No, I haven't. This
is pretty slick. Y there's
a whole thing going on
in the net right now
about why slow, where people
are running. This tool runs
inside a Firebug against their
websites and it basically applies
kind of 13 commandments that
Yahoo has come up with
for performance websites, things like
we've we have found in
our experience at Yahoo that
this number, some number is
the maximum number of JavaScript
you should have on a
page anymore. Can really cause
you performance problems. Or do
you have HTTP compression turned
on 13 different kinds of
commandments. You run it and
it gives you an a
through an F it's for
each of these 13. And
then it gives your site
on a, through an F
overall, I got like a
D all sorts of things
were wrong now. Not all
of the things that Yahoo
says are, are gold because
some of the suggestions like
the second one it makes
is use a content distribution
network. I don't think every
blog is going to use
Akamai to host their images,
geo synchronously located, know, you
know, whatever geo load balance
rather. But for the most
part, it shows not only
what you can do with
Firebug as an extension, but
it also gives us an
insight into what makes Yahoo
stuff so fast. Okay. So
I see that why slow
is in the developer category
under Firebug there's a whole
bunch of other things here,
new things in the developer's
life. Yeah. You know, there's
so there's so much stuff
going on the developer's world.
I don't want to make
this list just a, a
brain dump in the sense
of here's a bunch of
stuff. I really try to
put up things that I
not only use, but I
use, you know, every week
at the minimum things that
I really are tools that
are a part of my
life. I mean, anyone could
just put up a big,
giant list of tools. That's
just a bunch of stuff
out there. Right. But I
really wanted to express the,
these are the things I
use regularly. And in this
situation on the list where
I have an item and
then two other items that
are like indented, like for
example, I've got wind merge,
which is the diff tool
I've been using for years,
but I've also got kind
of an inner conflict going
on because source gear released
dif merge. It's a free
merge tool and they released
it because they thought that
they could make the world's
greatest emerge tool. And then
K diff three. These are,
these are three different diff
tools that I honestly and
truly go between. I hop
back and forth between these.
And I'm kind of having
a little inner turmoil, trying
to decide which one of
these I want to stick
with. I would use now
people always bring up beyond
compare from scooter software and
it totally is awesome, but
I haven't paid for it.
So these are the free
versions that I, I should
probably put beyond compare up
there. Cause if you want
to buy a diff tool,
it is the bomb. So
yeah, I should probably update
that don't Oh, Telerik the
Telerik code converter. And then
Carlos AGS code translator. These
are two sites that are
really great for converting C-sharp
to VB. So if you
have to write a sample
for an article and the
editor says, well, I want
the sample in both C-sharp
and VB. This is, these
are really great online tools
to do that. The Teleric
one it's a little smarter
than Carlos's, but Carlos has
does Ajax, so I can
just type and it'll automatically
do it. So I kind
of bounce back and forth
between those two. Those are
very cool. Then under like
XML stuff, doing developer stuff
in XML sketch path. It's
pretty cool. Sketch path.com. Do
you remember Don XMLs X
path mania? Yeah. We talked
about it on DNR TV
showed it. Yeah. It's kinda
like that, but it, it,
it does even more. It
lets you support. Basically. It
has libraries of expressions like
David for David for common
stuff like data tables or
open XML. And it's pretty,
pretty kind of on steroids.
Ex-pat mania is nice and
integrates into visual studio while
sketch path has kind of
a world of its own
reminds me of Roy Rove's
regulator number the regulator for
regular expressions. It's like that,
but it's four, four X
path it's in beta and
it, but it's crazy. It's,
it's, it's pretty hardcore and
X path can be pretty
intense. And one of the
I've been talking to Don
XML about, about XML for
link or link for XML,
I guess it's called. So
I'm working on an XML
chapter of a book right
now and I'm doing the
XML for link stuff right
now. And that seems to
be a, almost a direct
replacement for ex-pat It? I
wouldn't say well, by saying
it's a replacement that implies
that it was intended to
replace, but it definitely could
Within the bounds of normalcy.
I mean, when I say
that, I mean that it
does the same thing you
can do. You can do
queries with link for XML.
Yeah. Yeah. It was just
like you could with X
query. Of course we know
that that got dropped. Yep.
There's our next week show.
Let's do that. Let's do
XML X query a XML
for link or link for
eczema. That sounds good. All
right, we'll do it. Oh
yeah. Speaking of regular expressions,
David,  got a Ajax
space rejects tester. So this
is, you know, I like
these, I think these little
Ajax applications, like a little
rejects tester that lets me
type in a regular expression
then as I'm typing, it's
going in and updating all
the different things like the
matches in replacements, the match
groups, it's kind of an
online version of Chris cells,
rejects designer and then a,
a less.net focus, but really
excellent. One is called Rex
V and that's at Rex
v.org. And it's, it's more
focused on PHP, but it
is really, really thoughtfully laid
out rejects expression editor online.
And I use both of
both Davids are Yankees and,
and then red V or
I think it's actually called
Rex V the, of course
the launchers, I don't know
which launcher you use, but
the, the launchers fight in
my brain keeps getting worse
and worse. I still use
slick run. I just can't
seem to get my it
slick run as the little
floating text box. Right. Then
I use that for launching
almost all of my, all
my applications, but I put
three new ones up this
year that are kind of
taunting me, humanized, Enzo, E
N S O is a
really, really strange application written
in Python. But it is.
So if an application could
be called peaceful, you basically
has no UI. You push
down the, the caps lock
key and this big translucent
gray square kind of pops
up in the corner of
the screen. And you start
typing in this giant font
and you type in things
like open calc and then
let go of the caps
lock key. So it's up
only while you're holding caps
lock. So you hold caps
lock you type, and then
you let go and it
is the letting go. So
you, you lose your left
pinky in the process. Well
you do, but you surprisingly,
it did works. And the
interesting thing about this application
is it's completely modus. It
has no modal dialog of
any kind. You're only interfacing
with this modus kind of
gray square. So you might
be typing an email and
you might want to do
some math, some quick calculation
to insert a number into
your email. So you can
say, you know, Hey, Carl
pie is 22 over seven,
you type in 22, hyphen
seven, you select it. Then
you hit caps, lock type
calculate, and then let go.
And then it takes that
text that is in the
selected current application and replaces
it with the actual value,
you know, stuff like that.
Just kind of trying to
think for you. Another one
I added was-command@tridash.com. And that
dash command is a really
interesting one. It, it is
also trying to be focused
on what the current application
is doing. So it's, it's,
it's thoughtful about which application
is currently the one in
front. And it will like
if you type email and
start typing, it will pop
the email up and then
insert what you just typed
into the email. So a
lot of these applications are
just launchers, some of the
newer ones and a lot
of the older ones that
are trying to update themselves
to, to get the, the
crown of greatest launcher are
interacting more with Explorer. Like
you might click on a
folder, hit the launch button,
the quick dash button type
zip, and then let go
in that folder that you
had currently selected within get
zipped up. The other one
that I added was you
don't run all of these
simultaneously, do you? I do
actually run four or five
at a time, cause I'm
really trying to pick one
that's really going to do.
And I, I'm actually a
funny, I'm interacting with most
of these different folks, these
different launcher guys. They know
that I'm about launchers. So
when I have questions, thoughts,
things that I want to
make better, I will go
back and forth with them
and, and say, you know,
I really wish you would
have this particular command this
well, you're using Vesco, right?
I am using Vista. Yeah.
I don't use voice commands.
Well, that's funny that you
say that. So I'm using
voice commands a lot lately,
but I'm finding that the
little, even on this quad
proc machine, the little half
second pause as I wait
for the voice command to
be recognized is irritating. I
mean, I mean, this sincerely
irritating if I say open
notepad, and then it opens
that that was two, that
was very irritating, right. But
if I just go and
say, a window are bring
up, you know, slick run
type in and hit enter,
or if I use like
auto hot key and just
hit window in and brought
up notepad directly, I mean,
you just can't compete with
the voice stuff. It's got
to anticipate a little bit
better. And then the last
one that I added is
called direct access and direct
access is from a nagger
soft and a G a
R soft. And it's kind
of a silent application that
sits around in the background
watching for abbreviations. So if
you type, like if you're
in any application and you're
in, maybe you're in word,
you type in AMA and
then it searches Amazon. And
then there's lists and bundles
of abbreviations that it can
watch for. And it's got
a very, very clean and
fresh UI and the abbreviations
can be used not just
for launching stuff, but also
of course, for expanding. It's
almost like auto-correct for all
of windows. It's a lot
like active words, active words
has been around for, for
forever active wards.com. And it's,
it's one of these applications
that just is always there
in the back watching you
type. And then if it
sees you type something that
is that it can act
on, then it will, we'll
do we'll take action. It's
really interesting that between all
these launchers, they're all just
so similar, but they each
have a little thing that's
just different that makes them
worth keeping around. So I'm
tortured. So why not write
your own launcher? You know,
that's funny, I've actually started
writing my own answer two
or three times and then
realize that the amount of
work that every one of
these launchers does, even the
most simple one does is
really very significant. I mean,
you, you have to go
and search through the start
menu program files decide whether
or not you want to
inter interact with the windows
index. You have to keep
local storage, you have to
run as not admin. You
have to have nice, transparent
effects. You have to have
some kind of sense of
our art, artistic it. Once
you start writing the requirements,
you realize that it's better
to work with these guys
that are 80% of the
way there then for me
to start at zero. Right?
So not quite there. So
have you picked a favorite
yet? Oh man. I, you
know, I still use slick
run so that, that, but,
but I know that that
is very, very largely kind
of an emotional thing. Cause
lik run was like the
third or fourth that I
started using back in the
day. But if they are
on the list, I have
used them. I use them
and they're neat. So I
would encourage people to just
pick the one that makes
them happy. A lot of
people really like launchy launchy.net.
That's the one that people
keep pushing me towards mostly
the d.net developers. It just,
it just one sourceforge.net community
choice award for best new
project. It's open source and
it is written in C
sharp. So from a dotnet
developers perspective, you can't really
beat a C sharp application,
open source. That's getting community
choice awards. That's loved by
life hacker and has a
plugin model. So launchy is
a real, a real slick
when it's written by a
guy named Josh Carlin. So,
you know, if you want
to start somewhere, maybe start
with launching and then run
around and try the other
ones on the list. Okay.
A couple other while we
exist, as we wrap up
here, a couple others that
are really worth noting dark
room under is under the
stuff I just dig section
of the list and dark
room is a text editor,
but it's not a competing
text editor for notepad. It's
not one that you're going
to necessarily pop up all
the time. It basically takes
all of your screens, blacks
them out and give you
a nice clean dark room,
no UI of any kind
and just text. So I
give it a nice Kermit
green, old style terminal. Look,
you know, I've, I've given
all my command. I gave
him my command prompt window
that look, I like that.
Look, I really do. It's
very peaceful. It is very
peaceful. So when I just
want everything to go away,
I just, I fire up
dark room. I've actually got
it on a, on a
hot key. And it's kind
of the place that I
brainstorm. And I also use
it for kind of really
dramatic note taking during presentations.
Sometimes you've seen those presentations
I do without PowerPoint, right?
Me, me and notepad. Now
it's me in dark room.
So definitely worth checking out.
So no texts, bad, you
know, I just hate TextPad,
you know, maybe we'll end
on me just despising TextPad
with the heat of a
thousand suns. I hate this
stupid tool. One of the
things I hate texted about,
and I really don't hesitate.
I hate textbooks. And one
of the things that I,
that I hate about TextPad
is that by default control
F is not fine. It's
actually F five. That's just
irritating. Now I know I
can remap it, but that
doesn't change the fact that
it was irritating. I, I
liked notepad plus plus over
text bed. I also find
editing all the different syntax
bundles and texts back to
be very tedious. But I
know that there were those
that worship TextPad I am
just not that guy. Well,
Ooh, here's one, here's one
things, windows forgot the Vista
Kodak package. You might like
this. So, you know, there's
you ever find a video
that you're running around the
net and you find a,
you know, a new episode
of Seinfeld or whatever, something
you shouldn't be downloading a
that's in some funky video
format that you've never heard
of. And they want you
to go and download some
strange Kodak to get it
to work. That can be
dangerous because there are Kodak
viruses, but also they're hard
to manage and they're difficult
to an install. The Vista
codec Package. I did. I
got a JavaScript error on
the page in, on which
page seven on the Vista
code goes to Takota packages.
Yeah. When, when you surf
around a crazy set websites
like this that are generated,
you know, created by college
students or whatever. Yeah. You're
going to get a million
JavaScript popups, unless you're actively
debugging JavaScript. That's the first
thing I turned off. I
did not need them popping
up to telling me that
the what if, How do
you turn that off in
97? Did it tools alt
T O for options advanced
and you want to click
display a notification about every
script error and turn it
to off it's under the
browsing section of tools, options,
advanced settings browsing. Makes sense.
Okay. All right. It's I
mean, imagine if the system
would prompt you every single
time an HTML error came
up, that would be pretty
amazing. Okay. Anyway, Vista codec
package, it's literally just a
big old MSI installer with
all of the very best
non spyware, the video codecs
to get things like VOD
files, you know, the VOD
DVD files ass to get
them to play and media
center, to get them to
play in media and media
player 11, it's got QuickTime
real media vid Devex impact
to direct vibe. All of
these different things in one
bundle made it really, really
easy to get funky video
formats playing on Vista. And
if you don't have Vista,
you want to do like
XP. There's a CC CP
that combined combined community codec
pack that works on that
works on windows 2000 and
windows XP as well. Very
cool stuff. Okay. Yeah. There's
a bunch of stuff on
the, on this. I'm just
scrolling through here. We could,
we could talk for another
hour about, and we wouldn't
even make it halfway through
the list. Well, that's, that's
a pretty good start, I
think. And I think that
we're just about out of
time. And if you wanna
take a look at all
of the other things, you
should go up to a
handsome and Netcom do you
have a shrink stir link
for us? Well, right now
it's just hanselman.com/tools. That link
will always take you to
the latest version. So if
you blog about the list
or if you pass the
list to somebody, just tell
them hanselman.com/tools, it'll always go
to the latest version. Awesome.
One thing I want to
add though, as a, as
a shameless plug, and as
Lauren said at the beginning,
it there's a lot of
work that I put into
these lists. I'm not doing
it for anyone but myself,
but I do put a
great deal of effort into
the, into the list. And
I would really appreciate it
if you really liked the
list. If you like the
show, if you like reading
my blog, if you would
make a tax deductible donation
to the American diabetes association,
if you've listened to the
show or read the blog
for any amount of time,
you know that I'm a
type one diabetic on an
insulin pump and it kind
of sucks. And you can,
you can read about that
at hanselman.com/fight diabetes. I would
really encourage people to make
it a tax deductible donation.
All of it goes directly
to diabetes research. Doesn't go
to me. If you go
to hanselman.com/fight diabetes, we're trying
to raise $50,000 by October 20th.
And so far we've raised
$24,000. So I've got about
a month and a half,
two months. I gotta get
another 26 grand and Good
luck buddy, that I've donated.
Richard Campbell is donated in a
lot of the RDS have
as well. Yeah, they really
have, and I really do
appreciate that. Alright, Scott, thanks
as always, it's been a
great show and I always
enjoy reading your tool list
and you know, it always
takes a whole bunch of
time out, away from my
regular life to investigate all
these tools, but it's so
worth it. Thank you. Thank
you. Okay. And we'll see
you next week. I'm Hansel
minutes.